well I'm joined by Abdullah Al arayan
who is a professor of history at
Georgetown University in Qatar thank you
for your time sir so positive noises
coming from both Hamas and Israel to
this ceasefire proposal which is still
quite sketchy on the details the speech
itself though by President uh Biden that
seemed to be quite a significant
intervention it was I mean we haven't
seen this kind of highlevel intervention
on the part of of this uh Administration
to come from the president to basically
be outlying the details of what a
uh ceasefire agreement might look like I
think was significant at the same time
the US suffers from a tremendous
credibility problem as the this Chief
partner of Israel's genocide against
Palestinians and as a country that has
continually denied um all of the
atrocities that have taken place that's
vetoed multiple un Security Council
resolutions that has obviously led the
rearmament of of Israeli forces
throughout the entire last eight months
um so I think there's still very much a
long way to go here but at the same time
I think it's it's certainly clear what a
resolution would look like and so what's
been suggested here is very much the
outlines of what we've always known
would be necessary to see uh you know
this this bring brought to an end and uh
did you get the impression at all uh
when listening uh to President Biden
that this proposal had been forced on
the Israelis well certainly what we're
seeing is is that there is a lack of
political will and the leadership and
the Israeli leadership which of course
is trying to prosecute a war uh and in
fact the genocide side in a way to
preserve its own political fortunes
going forward and at the same time I
think there is a recognition among some
segments of the Israeli political Elites
particularly those in the military and
and uh intelligence kind of
establishment who see that there is no
military solution here and that in the
last eight months they've actually not
achieved any of those stated goals and
in fact that the only real meaningful uh
you know solution here is to reach this
agreement and in in a negotiated sense
and so there certainly does seem to be
that recognition among some segments of
the Israeli Elite um and I think this is
certainly what the US Administration is
tapping into so when Biden references
that he's really speaking about certain
figures who've kind of alluded to this
going forward and and have uh actually
put together many of the terms that
we've seen in terms of what this
agreement looks like we heard from our
correspondent earlier that it is of
course Shabbat today which is why we're
not hearing very much from the Israelis
but we may start hearing from them
tonight and and tomorrow how how do you
expect them to respond well certainly
we've already seen some rejection of
this right from the prime minister to
many of the most uh extremist Fringe
members of his cabinet and at the same
time I think you know depending on
whether we see that there's a real
political will on the American side to
finally pressure Israel again something
that hasn't been there in eight months
and and there's been a sort of historic
level of complete uh support and and
basically acquiescence to anything that
Israel has done so far whether we're
seeing a real significant shift in a
material shift from the US perspective I
think remains to be seen again we've
heard a lot of words over these months
coming out of Biden we've never seen any
actual action taking place and so
depending on what happens on the US side
we can see potentially a response on the
Israeli side and looking at uh how Hamas
might respond uh there were two things
that stood out for me uh one that the uh
outline didn't contain any mention of a
permanent ceasefire in page page one uh
phase one which is what Hamas has always
been calling for and secondly I don't
know if if if if this was quite
interesting to you uh Biden President
Biden talked about Israel withdrawing
from all populated areas of Gaza what
did do you mean by that well again I
mean the this is uh this is what they
mean when they say the devil is in the
details right is we don't know
necessarily if uh there's some kind of
acknowledgement on the US side that
Israel will remain occupying parts of of
Raza even after um you know the the
ceasefire is reached and so I think this
is a major sticking point and certainly
one that Palestinians have continuously
rejected that any part of Gaza should
remain occupied um and in terms of
whether there's a permanent ceasefire I
think the idea of a six- week long pause
or let's say you know a temporary
ceasefire is meant to lead to
negotiations toward a a full ceasefire
again a lot of questions around what
that would entail I think there's a
major contradiction here in the fact
that both the US and uh the Israeli side
have said on the one hand that they
don't want a future in Gaza that in
which Hamas has any kind of political
role uh left and at the same time this
is an agreement that would have to be
reached through negotiations with Hamas
so how do you do that right how do you
eliminate them as a political force and
at the same time are reaching negotiated
solution that is agreed upon by all
parties so there's still very much a lot
to work out in terms of the details and
a lot of contradictions in terms of what
the US Israeli side is saying which is
why we can see that no one in Gaza is
getting excited about this there a lot
still to come okay thank you for that
abdulla Al Aran a professor of history
at Georgetown University